For this problem, assume that you have a fully
functioning 5-stage pipelined beta with full
bypassing and annulment of branch delay slots
as presented in lecture.
This beta has been running the program shown
here for a while.
The actual functionality of this program is
not so important for this problem, but lets
just review it quickly.
This program begins by initializing R1 to
0 before entering the loop.
R1 represents the index of the array element
currently being accessed.
Within the loop, the value of that array element
is loaded into R0.
R1 is then incremented by 4 in order to point
to the next element in the array.
We then compare the array element that was
just loaded into R0 with the updated index
in R1 and if they are equal, then we repeat
the loop.
If they are not equal, then we store the current
value of R1 into a memory location called
index to remember which index value satisfied
the compare instruction.
We want to understand how this program would
run on our beta.
In order to do this, we will create a pipeline
diagram showing the execution of this program.
A pipeline diagram demonstrates which instruction
is currently being executed in each of the
5 pipeline stages.
Our rows indicate the pipeline stage that
the instruction is in.
There are five pipeline stages.
The first is IF, or instruction fetch, which
fetches the next instruction from memory.
The second is RF, or register file stage which
reads the source operands of the instruction.
Next comes the ALU stage where all required
arithmetic and logic unit operations are executed.
The fourth stage is the MEM stage where we
can begin accessing memory for a load or store
operation because the address of the memory
location was computed in the ALU stage.
Finally, the last stage is WB, or the write
back stage where the results are written back
into the register file.
The columns in a pipeline diagram represent
the execution cycles.
Our loop begins with a LD operation, so we
see our LD instruction in the IF stage in
cycle 1001.
The LD operation then proceeds down the 5
stages of the pipelined beta.
Next comes the ADDC instruction.
Since there is no dependency between the LD
and the ADDC instruction, the ADDC instruction
begins in cycle 1002 and proceeds through
all the 5 stages of the beta pipeline as well.
Next comes the CMPEQ instruction.
When we reach the CMPEQ instruction, we are
met with our first data hazard caused by the
fact that the LD is updating R0, and the CMPEQ
wants to read this new value of R0.
Recall, that a LD does not produce its value
until the WB stage of the pipeline.
This means that even with full bypassing logic,
the CMPEQ instruction cannot read register
R0 until the LD is in the WB stage.
So we must initiate a stall of the pipeline
in cycle 1004.
The stall can be seen in our pipeline diagram
in cycle 1005 where the CMPEQ has remained
in the RF stage and we have inserted a NOP
in place of the CMPEQ that was coming down
the pipe one cycle earlier.
The instruction that follows the CMPEQ is
the BNE.
Notice that it entered the IF stage in cycle
1004, but it too was stalled by the CMPEQ,
so the BNE remains in the IF stage while the
CMPEQ is stuck in the RF stage.
In cycle 1005, the CMPEQ is able to complete
the read of its operands by using the bypass
path from the WB stage to read the updated
value of R0, and by using the bypass path
from the MEM stage to read the updated value
of R1 produced by the ADDC instruction.
In cycle 1006, the CMPEQ instruction moves
on to the ALU stage and the BNE can move on
to the RF stage.
Since the CMPEQ is going to update the value
of R2 which is the register that the BNE is
trying to read, we need to make use of the
bypass path from the ALU stage to the RF stage
in order to provide the BNE with the result
of the CMPEQ instruction in cycle 1006.
The RF stage is also the stage when Z is generated.
The Z signal tells the beta whether or not
a register is equal to zero.
This means that by the end of the RF stage
in cycle 1006, the BNE will know whether it
is repeating the loop or not.
We now illustrate what happens to the pipeline
diagram if the loop is repeated.
In cycle 1006, the ST instruction enters the
IF stage of the pipeline because until we
resolve whether a branch is taken or not,
we assume that we should continue fetching
the next instruction.
If the BNE determines that it should branch
back to LOOP, then this ST instruction which
was just fetched must be annulled by inserting
a NOP in its place.
The annulment is initiated in cycle 1006 and
shows up as a NOP in the RF stage in cycle
1007.
In cycle 1007, we also see that we now fetch
the first instruction of the loop which is
the LD instruction so that we can repeat the
loop.
Here is a complete pipeline diagram showing
repeated execution of the loop in our sample
code together with the bypass paths being
used as well as the initiation of stalls and
annulment of branch delay slots.
We are now ready to answer a few questions
about the execution of this loop on our beta.
The first question we want to consider is
which of the registers R0, R1, and/or R2 were
read at least once directly from the register
file rather than through a bypass path?
Looking back at our completed pipeline diagram,
we see that the LD and ADDC instructions did
not get their operands through bypass paths.
Since both of those instructions read R1,
that means that register R1 was read at least
once directly from the register file.
R0 which is only read by the CMPEQ always
comes from a bypass path.
Similarly, R2, which is only read by the BNE,
always comes from a bypass path as well.
Next, we want to identify the cycle in which
stall was set to 1 in the pipelined beta hardware.
This occurs in the cycle where the stall is
initiated which was in cycle 1004.
At the end of that cycle the instructions
that are currently in the IF and RF stage
are stalled by not allowing a load of a new
value into the instruction registers of that
pipeline stage.
Next, we want to determine in which cycle
was ANNUL_IF != 0?
Recall that the ANNUL_STAGE control signals
specify when an annulment is initiated in
that particular stage.
In order to initiate an annulment, then the
instruction that is currently in the IF stage
is replaced with a NOP.
This occurs in the IF stage when we need to
annul a branch delay slot.
In our example this occurs in cycle 1006.
In which cycle was ANNUL_RF != 0?
This question is asking when an annulment
was initiated in the RF stage.
This occurred when the CMPEQ instruction needed
to be stalled in the RF stage.
In order to fill the pipeline bubbles, a NOP
is inserted into the pipeline in place of
the CMPEQ instruction that was in the RF stage
in cycle 1004.
The stall and thus the setting of ANNUL_RF
!= 0 occurs in cycle 1004.
In which cycle was ANNUL_ALU != 0?
In other words, in which cycle did we initiate
the replacement of an instruction in the ALU
stage with a NOP?
This does not occur in our example.
Next, we want to consider our bypass paths.
In which cycle was either bypass coming from
the ALU stage?
In cycle 1006, the BNE reads the result of
the CMPEQ instruction from the ALU stage.
In which cycle was either bypass coming from
the MEM stage?
In cycle 1005, the CMPEQ reads the result
of the ADDC instruction from the MEM stage.
Finally, in which cycle was either bypass
coming from the WB stage?
In cycle 1005, the CMPEQ reads the result
of the LD instruction from the WB stage.